# Two Data Types

## Quantitative and Categorical

### 1. Quantitative

Quantitative data takes on **numeric values** that allows us to perform mathematical operations (like the number of dogs).

### 2. Categorical

Categorical are used to **label a group or set of items** (like dog breeds - Collies, Labs, Poodles, etc.). When analyzing categorical variables, we commonly just look at the count or percent of a group that falls into each level of a category. For example, if we had two levels of a dog category: `lab` and `not lab`. We might say, 32% of the dogs were lab (percent), or we might say 32 of the 100 dogs I saw were labs (count).

## Categorical Subsets: Ordinal and Nominal
We can divide Categorical datatypes into two subsets: Ordinal and Nominal

1. **Ordinal** data takes on a ranked ordering (like a ranked interaction on a scale from Very Poor to Very Good with the dogs).

2. **Nominal** data do not have an order or ranking (like the breeds of the dog).

### Ordinal Vs. Nominal
In looking at categorical variables, we found Gender, Marital Status, Zip Code and your Breakfast items are **NOMINAL** variables where there is no order ranking associated with this type of data.

Alternatively, **ORDINAL** data such as the Letter Grade or Survey Ratings **have a rank ordering** associated with it. If you receive an A, this is higher than an A-. An A- is ranked higher than a B+, and so on... Ordinal variables frequently occur on rating scales from very poor to very good.

## Quantitative Subsets: Continuous and Discrete
We can divide Quantitative datatypes into two subsets: Continuous and Discrete

1. **Continuous** data can be split into smaller and smaller units, and still a smaller unit exists. An example of this is the age of the dog - we can measure the units of the age in years, months, days, hours, seconds, but there are still smaller units that could be associated with the age. Continous data can be broken down and have decimals. 

2. **Discrete** data only takes on countable values, just one number, and no decimals. The number of dogs we interact with is an example of a discrete data type. 

## Quantitative Vs. Categorical
Some of these can be a bit tricky - notice even though zip codes are a number, they aren’t really a quantitative variable. If we add two zip codes together, we do not obtain any useful information from this new value. Therefore, this is a categorical variable.

Height, Age, the Number of Pages in a Book and Annual Income all take on values that we can add, subtract and perform other operations with to gain useful insight. Hence, these are quantitative.

Gender, Letter Grade, Breakfast Type, Marital Status, and Zip Code can be thought of as labels for a group of items or individuals. Hence, these are categorical.

***

# Four Aspects of Quantitative Data

## Analyzing Quantitative Data

There are **four main aspects of analyzing Quantitative data**.

1. Measures of Center
2. Measures of Spread
3. The Shape of the data.
4. Outliers

### Analyzing Categorical Data
Analyzing categorical data has fewer parts to consider. Categorical data is analyzed usually be looking at the counts or proportion of individuals that fall into each group. For example, if we were looking at the breeds of the dogs, we would care about how many dogs are of each breed, or what proportion of dogs are of each breed type.

## Measures of Center
There are three measures of center:
1. Mean (Average)
2. Median (Centre)
3. Mode (Frequency)

### The Mean
The mean is often called the **average** or the **expected value** in mathematics. We calculate the mean by adding all of our values together and dividing by the number of values in our dataset.

### The Median
The median splits our data so that 50% of our values are lower and 50% are higher.

### Median for Odd Values
If we have an odd number of observations, the median is simply the number in the direct middle. For example, if we have 7 observations, the median is the fourth value when our numbers are ordered from smallest to largest. If we have 9 observations, the median is the fifth value.

### Median for Even Values
If we have an even number of observations, the median is the average of the two values in the middle. For example, if we have 8 observations, we average the fourth and fifth values together when our numbers are ordered from smallest to largest.

In order to compute the median, we **MUST** sort our values first.

Whether we use the mean or median to describe a dataset is largely dependent on the shape of our dataset and if there are any outliers. 

### The Mode
The mode is the most frequently observed value in our dataset.

There might be multiple modes for a particular dataset or no mode at all.

### No Mode
If all observations in our dataset are observed with the same frequency, there is no mode. If we have the dataset:

```
1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4
```

There is no mode because all observations occur the same number of times.

### Many Modes
If two (or more) numbers share the maximum value, then there is more than one mode. If we have the dataset:

```
1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 6, 6, 7, 8, 9
```

There are two modes `3` and `6`, because these values share the maximum frequencies at 3 times, while all other values only appear once.


***


# Notation
Notation is a common language used to communicate mathematical ideas. Think of notation as a universal language used by academic and industry professionals to convey mathematical ideas. 

You likely already know some notation. Plus, minus, multiply, division, and equal signs all have mathematical symbols that you are likely familiar with. Each of these symbols replaces an idea for how numbers interact with one another.

We might have the random variable `X`, **which is a holder for the possible values** of the amount of time someone spends on our site. 

`X` is 'a holder' of the values that could possibly occur for the amount of time spent on our website. Any number from 0 to infinity really.

## Capital vs. Lower Case Letters
Random variables are represented by capital letters. Once we observe an outcome of these random variables, we notate it as a lower case of the same letter.

### Example 1
The amount of time someone spends on our site is a random variable (we are not sure what the outcome will be for any particular visitor), and we would notate this with `X`. Then when the first person visits the website, if they spend 5 minutes, we have now observed this outcome of our random variable. We would notate any outcome as a lowercase letter with a subscript associated with the order that we observed the outcome.

If 5 individuals visit our website, the first spends 10 minutes, the second spends 20 minutes, the third spends 45 mins, the fourth spends 12 minutes, and the fifth spends 8 minutes; we can notate this problem in the following way:

`X` is the amount of **time** an individual spends on the website. Notice uppercase for random variables.

x<sub>1</sub> = 10, x<sub>2</sub> = 20, x<sub>3</sub> = 12, x<sub>4</sub> = 45, x<sub>5</sub> =  8

`n` = number of rows in the dataset

The `X` is associated with this idea of a random variable, while the observations of the random variable take on **lowercase** `x` values.

### Example 2
Taking this one step further, we could ask:

What is the probability someone spends more than 20 minutes on our website?

In notation, we would write:

```
P(X > 20)?
```

Here `P` stands for **probability**, while the parentheses encompass the statement for which we would like to find the probability. Since X represents the amount of time spent on the website, this notation represents the probability the amount of time on the website is greater than 20.

We could find this in the above example by noticing that only one of the 5 observations exceeds 20. So, we would say there is a 1 (the 45) in 5 or 20% chance that an individual spends more than 20 minutes on our website (based on this dataset).

### Example 3
If we asked: What is the probability of an individual spending 20 or more minutes on our website? We could notate this as:

```
P(X >= 20)?
```

We could then find this by noticing there are two out of the five individuals that spent 20 or more minutes on the website. So this probability is 2 out of 5 or 40%.