After **measures of center**, the second aspect of analyzing quantitative variables is **measures of spread**.

# Measures of Spread 
Measures of spread are used to give us an idea of how spread out our data is from one another. How far our points are from one another.

**Four common measures of spread include:**

1. Range
2. Interquartile Range (IQR)
3. Standard Deviation
4. Variance

It is easiest to understand the spread of our data visually. The most common visual for quantitative data is called a Histogram.

In order to understand how Histograms are constructed, let's consider the following dataset. 

```
1,2,2,4  5,7,8  9,12  15
```

First, we need to bin our data. The number of values in each bin, determine the hit of each Histogram bar. 

Image here

_Note: In most cases, the software will choose our bins for us._


***


## Calculating the 5 Number Summary
The most common way to **measure the spread** of our data is by looking at the **5 Number Summary** which gives values for calculating the **range** and **interquartile range**.

The 5 number summary consists of 5 values:

1. Minimum: The smallest number in the dataset.
2. Q<sub>1</sub>: The value such that 25% of the data fall below.
3. Q<sub>2</sub>: The value such that 50% of the data fall below (**Median**)
4. Q<sub>3</sub>: The value such that 75% of the data fall below.
5. Maximum: The largest value in the dataset.

### Range
The range is calculated as the difference between the maximum and the minimum.

### IQR
The interquartile range is calculated as the difference between Q<sub>3</sub> and Q<sub>1</sub>.

## Finding the 5 Number Summary

### Example: Odd set of data values

Consider the following dataset: 

```
5,8,3,2,1,3,10
```

The first thing we need to do to calculate our 5 Number Summary is to order our values.

```
1,2,3,3,5,8,10
```

Once ordered, the **MINIMUM** and **MAXIMUM** values are easy to identify. In this case `1` and `10`

The **MEDIAN** or **Q<sub>2</sub>** is the middle value in our dataset. In this case:

1,2,3,`3`,5,8,10

The remaining values to complete the 5 Number Summary are **Q<sub>1</sub>** and **Q<sub>3</sub>**. These values can be thought of as the **medians** of data on either side of **Q<sub>2</sub>**

1,`2`,3,3,5,`8`,10

_NOTE: Q<sub>2</sub> was not in either set of data points to calculate Q<sub>1</sub> or Q<sub>3</sub>._

Our 5 Number Summary is thus:

1. Minimum: 1
2. **Q<sub>1</sub>**: 2
3. **Q<sub>2</sub>**: 3
4. **Q<sub>3</sub>**: 8
5. Maximum: 10

### Example: Even set of data values

```
5,8,3,2,1,3,10,105
```

Again, we first need to order the values

```
1,2,3,3,5,8,10,105
```

The MIN and MAX are `1` and `105`.

To calculate the MEDIAN or **Q<sub>2</sub>** we need to calculate the **MEAN** of `3` and `5`.

**Q<sub>2</sub>** = (3+5)/2 = 4

To calculate **Q<sub>1</sub>** and **Q<sub>3</sub>** we divide our dataset between the two value we used to find our median. 

For this dataset, the value of **Q<sub>1</sub>** will be:

**Q<sub>1</sub>** = (2+3)/2 = 2.5

The value of **Q<sub>3</sub>** will be

**Q<sub>3</sub>** = (8+10)/2 = 9

Once we've calculated the values of the 5 Number Summary, finding the **Range** and **IQR** is easy.

The range is calculated as the **MAXIMUM** - **MINIMUM**.

```
Range = 10 - 1 = 9
```

The IQR is calculated as **Q<sub>3</sub>** - **Q<sub>1</sub>**.

```
IQR = 8 - 2 = 6
```

### Standard Deviation and Variance
Most times you don't want to always have to calculate the 5 Number Summary. The most common way to measure the spread from a single value is with the **Standard Deviation** or **Variance**. 

The **standard deviation** is one of the most common measures for talking about the spread of data. It is defined as **the average distance of each observation from the mean**. The standard deviation on average, tells us how much each point varies from the mean of the points.

### The Math
Imagine we have a dataset with 4 values:

```
10,14,10,6
```

The first thing we need to do to calculate the standard deviation is to find the **MEAN**. In notation, we have this as `x bar`. For the above values, the sum is `40` and we have `4` values so the mean is `40/4 = 10`.

Then we want to look at the distance of each observation from this MEAN of `10`

```
10 - 10 = 0
14 - 10 = 4
10 - 10 = 0
6 - 10 = -4
```

Two of these observations are exactly equal to the MEAN `10 - 10 = 0`. So the distance is `0`. One is `4` larger than the MEAN and one is `4` smaller than the MEAN. In notation, each of these is `xi - xbar`. Each value needs to be **positive**, the way we do this is by **squaring** them all.

```
(10 - 10)|2 = 0|2 = 0
(14 - 10)|2 = 4|2 = 16
(10 - 10)|2 = 0|2 = 0
(6 - 10) = -4|2 = 16
```

Now, we can average these to find the average squared distance of each observation from the MEAN. This is called the **VARIANCE**. Finding the MEAN is the same as we did before, adding the values and dividing by the number of values. In this case:

```
0 + 16 + 0 + 16 = 32/4 = 8 (Variance)
```

However, this is the average of **SQUARED** values.  Which we only did to get positive values in the first place. **Standard deviation is the square root of the variance.** In this case, the square root of the variance, which is `8` is `2.83`. So, `2.83` is on average, how far each dataset is from the MEAN which is the definition of the **standard deviation**.

### Example
For the following set of data provide the value of the variance. 
(Round your answer to two decimal places at the end of your calculation. 
Do not round values before the final answer)

```
1, 5, 10, 3, 8, 12, 4
```

First, let's order them

```
1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12
```

Then add them and divide by number of values

```
1 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 8 + 10 + 12 = 43/7 = 6.14
```

To find the variance subtract 6.14 from the values and if negative square them all

```
1 - 6.14 = -5.14|2 = 26.4196
3 - 6.14 = -3.14|2 = 9.8596
4 - 6.14 = -2.14|2 = 4.5796
5 - 6.14 = -1.14|2 = 1.2996
8 - 6.14 = 1.86|2  = 3.4596
10 - 6.14 = 3.86|2 = 14.8996
12 - 6.14 = 5.86|2 = 34.3396

Total after adding = 94.8572

Variance = 94.8572/7 = 13.55

Standard Deviation = square root of 13.55 = 3.68
```

The Standard Deviation is used all the time to get a single number to compare the spread of two datasets. It's nice to talk about how spread out our data is without having to report an entire table of numbers (5 Number Summary). 

## Standard Deviation vs. Variance
The standard deviation is the square root of the variance. In practice, you usually use the standard deviation rather than the variance. The reason for this is because the standard deviation shares the same units with our original data, while the variance has squared units.

## Important Points
1. The variance is used to compare the spread of two different groups. A set of data with higher variance is more spread out than a dataset with lower variance. Be careful though, there might just be an outlier (or outliers) that is increasing the variance when most of the data are actually very close.

2. When comparing the spread between two datasets, the units of each must be the same.

3. When data are related to money or the economy, higher variance (or standard deviation) is associated with higher risk.

4. The standard deviation is used more often in practice than the variance because it shares the units of the original dataset.


***

# The Spread of our data
Now that we know how to build a Histogram, we can use this to determine the **shape** of our data.

### Shape
From a histogram, we can quickly identify the shape of our data, which helps influence all of the measures we learned in the previous concepts. We learned that the distribution of our data is frequently associated with one of the **three shapes**:

1. **Right-skewed** (Mean **greater** than Median). The Histogram with shorter bins on the right and taller bins on the left.

2. **Left-skewed** (Mean **less** than Median). The Histogram with shorter bins on the left and taller bins on the right.

3. **Symmetric** (frequently normally distributed) (Mean **equals** Median, which also equals the Mode). If the right side mirrors the left side it is called Symmetric. One of the most common Symmetric distributions is called a **Normal Distribution or Bell Curve**

The **mode of a distribution** is essentially the **tallest bar in a histogram**. There may be multiple modes depending on the number of peaks in our histogram.

***

# Outliers
Outliers are points that fall very far from the rest of our data points. This influences measures such as the mean and standard deviation much more than measures associated with the five number summary.

There are a number of different methods for determining outliers, one unscientific method is simply to look at the histogram and see if any data points are really far from the rest of the data points.

### Common Techniques for dealing with Outliers
When outliers are present we should consider the following points.

1. Noting they exist and the impact on summary statistics.

2. If typo - remove or fix

3. Understanding why they exist, and the impact on questions we are trying to answer about our data.

4. Reporting the 5 number summary values is often a better indication than measures like the mean and standard deviation when we have outliers.

5. Be careful in reporting. Know how to ask the right questions.

***

# Descriptive vs. Inferential Statistics

## Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics is about describing our collected data using the measures of center, measures of spread, shape of our distribution, and outliers. We can also use plots of our data to gain a better understanding.

## Inferential Statistics
Inferential Statistics is about using our collected data to draw conclusions to a larger population. Performing inferential statistics well requires that we take a sample that accurately represents our population of interest.

A common way to collect data is via a survey. However, surveys may be extremely biased depending on the types of questions that are asked, and the way the questions are asked. This is a topic you should think about when tackling the first project.

We looked at specific examples that allowed us to identify the

* **Population** - our entire group of interest.
* **Parameter** - numeric summary of a population
* **Sample** - a subset of the population
* **Statistic** - numeric summary of a sample